foreign isn't in a place where I can
trust my thoughts so I'm going to go get
my brain into place and my body in a
place where I can trust my thoughts
where I'm out of my trauma so that I can
think clearly because if I'm acting out
of the trauma I will recreate it over
and over and over and over again welcome
to the art of accomplishment where we
explore how deepening connection with
ourselves and others leads to creating
the life we want with enjoyment and ease
I'm Brett Kistler here today with my
co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
yeah so wow that was quite an opening q
a
yeah art of accomplishment is on yeah
holy holy crap yeah people went there oh
my gosh unlike any start of anything
I've been in there's amazing how
vulnerable it got how quickly it was it
was really cool yeah I remember like
last year the first the first q a after
the first week of work went really
really deep and we were all blown away
but this one was just like the
orientation like you're going through a
bunch of PowerPoint slides and it was
like oh man I can bet half of the people
here are probably bored to tears and
then like before you know it a couple
questions come through and it's straight
to the core straight to it yeah yeah
Sarah was saying to me she said oh I was
scared at a minute like last year we got
lightning in a bottle and it might not
happen again she goes that fear is
completely gone
she's just like I first thing she said
when I called she goes I miss AOA calls
this is great yeah it was awesome yeah
yeah so something I wanted to talk about
today is something that I saw today in
this call so many of the things that we
do in this work so many of the times
that I see you work with people
it often boils down to some form of
family Dynamic and we've talked about
this before that we have these
projections that we carry from our
childhood people who are caretakers or
parents or family members but also
projections of society uh projections of
money but in particular these there's
something to this concept of family
dynamics that just continually comes up
and I've noticed it come up in my life a
lot in my relationships I've projected
my mother onto basically anybody I've
ever dated uh to varying levels of
effect I've projected my mother and my
father onto like the management in the
company in my company and
in Friendship groups and so a lot of
times when we do this work there'll be a
group it's often in a group setting and
I know that you size those groups such
that family Dynamics can come up and
then be worked with
so yeah let's let's talk about that a
little bit tell me a little bit about
what family Dynamics means to you and
what makes this important something
that's most interesting about is like
family Dynamics are cool and the fact
that they allow you to see why things
are coming up and they're also cool in
the fact that it gives you one way to
heal
patterns that are
no longer useful to you in your life
that's what makes them cool there it's
also you know if you look at like
Freud's work or like a lot of the early
Psychotherapy work it was all very
focused on that early family stuff and
and there's a lot of ways to have
significant transformation without ever
really going into any of it so I I say
that at the front end just to say that
it's like
there's lots of avenues of
transformation there's lots of ways of
healing there's no one way and so this
is a cool thing to talk about but if
anybody's listening thinking that this
is the only way like please let that go
in your head
but the way I think about it the the
best explanation I've ever heard is that
our brains you know there's many brain
waves that we're like hang out in and so
there's Delta and Alpha and beta and
Theta and Theta is kind of the the
brain wave that we get into right before
we go to sleep or right as we're waking
up it is the brain waves that happens
when you're under hypnosis and it's the
brain wave that you're in basically from
like zero to
seven eight years old for the majority
of it and it's really a way that you're
being programmed just like you would
under hypnosis and so as kids are young
they're in these Theta brain waves it's
why that like fairies are real for them
and
uh it's why that you know they're in a
magical reality it's kind of that dream
state between that dream and awake space
in the American Indian culture was
represented by dragonflies which I just
think is a beautiful
you know imagery of like what that is
and um
anyhow and so they're we're being
programmed in that young age and we're
in that brain state that tells us what
reality is and So This Is Love love is
what we experience Mom and Dad doing and
how we experience their interactions
with us this is what money looks like
this is what
power looks like this is what nature
looks like so we get taught all this
whole way of looking at the world in
those young
time so if you're three years old and
you're scared and you run to mom and
she's like it's time for you to be
strong that's what you're going to learn
if the mom pulls you up and holds you
that's what you're going to learn if the
mom slaps you and says why do you always
bug me that's what you're going to learn
and that's how you're going to react to
fear so that's the way I think about it
it's just like that zero to eight years
old particularly is very much your
programming I think it continues I think
we learn things traumatic events can
teach us and unteach us things so
there's other experiences that we can
have
therefore that's reality and if we stay
in that path whatever we learned in that
time frame
even though it might be painful it's
very easy to stay there it's when you
move out of that path that it becomes
challenging and the other thing about
this which I is ancillary but I think
cool to think about is that most of the
transformation techniques that I've seen
be very useful
tap into the Theta brain waves like it
oftentimes when people say finish uh
groundbreakers
the week-long course that we do very
rarely people are like I can't remember
anything that happened
I like I don't know what happened and
when we when you and I did ESF together
people were like what the hell happened
it's been three days but I don't know
what happened yeah I can still hardly
remember 95 of what happened there yeah
and so it's very much it's because
you're in that Theta space and and
that's where you're doing the
reprogramming yeah yeah so so to bring
some some examples into this on the on
the Q a today somebody had just made a
comment in a in a session with you and
they were like well I'm enduring the
storm or I'm weathering the storm and
you're like wait a minute in that
there's still an enduring going on and
like you can see you can see the whole
fractal family Dynamics show up of like
okay I was taught that life is a storm
to be weathered and you could see how
that might create a pattern where you
know like if if I'm carrying that that
belief then I will be attracted to
people who are also experiencing life as
something to be endured and then we find
this thing where we're enduring it
together
and that that could be one way if my
mother was that way to me or was that
way with life and taught that to me then
I might find myself in a relationship
and even if I'm if I'm resisting that if
I'm like I don't want to live with the
life that feels like enduring then I'll
find myself living a life where I'm
resisting
the perspective that it's being endured
and finding others in my life to feel
that resistance with yes so sometimes
you're finding people who are seeing the
world the way you see it but you're also
finding people to prove that the way you
see it is right so if you're somebody
who believes that the world should be
endured then you're probably also
finding somebody who makes you endure
life so so you'll find people who both
become the thing to be endured and the
people who you can say oh isn't it true
we have to endure life together that
seems to be the pattern that you
recreate over and over again right right
so let's talk about a couple of other
like example patterns just to make sure
we're not in one particular Zone here
um like another thing that might happen
is that you might have somebody might
grow up with a father who's somewhat
emotionally absent they're always
working but they're providing for the
family and sort of their role is
creating creating a space in the home
but they're not as present maybe because
they can't be
and then that person grows up and then
they find themselves doing the same
thing or also just expecting the same of
others yeah or marrying that exacting
that yeah yeah so they might become the
role of the father or they might marry
the role of the father and expect that
that's what just as normal yeah maybe
maybe another example to paint like a
third example into this picture is you
know a mother who has a hard time
accepting the way that uh the way that
her child is different from her or
following a different path and struggles
with that so then the child grows up
with a belief that and then dating
people who have a hard time accepting
parts of them and feeling judged and
there's an intermediate step there right
which is Mom doesn't fully approve of me
therefore the voice in the head doesn't
fully approve of me therefore I date
other people who don't fully approve of
me that's all part of that scheme and
and those are all that we can find one
of those for all of us we can all find
one of those but there's also ones that
almost pertain to almost everybody not
everybody but almost everybody and I'll
just give a really simple example of
that as a kid one of the things that you
learn is that there is a
mother and a father in their authority
figures and they have control over your
life
and so most people walk around the world
with a boss
who's an authority figure who has
control over their life not everybody
but most people walk around the world
with that
now I'll often tell clients you don't
have a boss
you have a client you have a customer
unfortunately you're not Diversified you
don't have lots of customers you only
have one but you have a customer
and they're not your boss they're not
your authority figure there's somebody
who's a customer and you can lose them
or you can get another customer
or another client whatever you however
you want to look at it just even the
perspective that you have a boss who has
some sort of control over your life
is a projection of a family Dynamic
typically yeah and that points to
something that this family Dynamic thing
is which is
when you were growing up it was real you
know your parents had authority over you
you didn't have certain kinds of power
that you do as an adult but the
perception continues
yes and then that's that's the way that
that the lives that we lived in our
family become the lives that we recreate
in
you know subtler and subtler ways as we
mature and develop that's right that's
exactly how it works what are some
examples of how this has shown up in the
workplace there's you just had the boss
projection how about like within a
within a team what are some ways that
perhaps some people's family Dynamic
issues interact with one another
uh what are what are some examples that
you've seen one of the coolest things
you just said in the team one of the
tricks that I will teach
um to Executives is that if they aren't
the authority figure in the room that
everybody's reporting to then a lot of
these Dynamics diminish
so one really cool way to stop those
kind of projections that we're about to
speak to is to make the team report to
itself meaning every time you have a
team meeting somebody else is
responsible for holding accountability
meaning that the team when somebody
fails it's not the boss who says hey
what happened it's the team that says
hey what happened like to really make
the accountability to the team which is
really where the accountability lies
it's not to a boss
and so that's a just a just a cool way
that you can create a structure inside
of an organization that changes a lot of
this kind of Dynamics which is just a
drag on an organization
the drag can be so many ways it can be I
project onto my boss that I need to
please them I project onto my boss that
them they're never happy with me I
project onto my boss that their opinion
matters more than my opinion or that
they have more Authority than me
the my one of my favorites is I project
onto my boss that they're a bad
authority figure and I need to rebel
against them one of the more destructive
ones that I see a lot of is
you know if I grew up with a say a
father or mother who I always
disappointed I will recreate ways to
disappoint my boss and you see you see
that happening all the time where people
are creating ways to disappoint their
boss but they can't see that they're
recreating it
so that all of that happens and then the
boss also
has projections back like I'm
responsible for these people no that the
boss is not responsible for that
everybody's responsible for themselves
or
um these people I can't depend on them I
have to do it all myself
or I can't let them down or nobody can
do it except me or
I'm necessary that's one of my favorite
ones that bosses have is that and you
see this especially at like
not exactly the top tier of an
organization a big organization but the
level below that when I work with
Executives that are
you know not quite at the sea level
often times that those people the big
thing that they have to do to get to the
next level is
learn that they their job is to become
unnecessary that they aren't necessary
anymore that they can create a structure
that basically makes them irrelevant and
when they do that
boy they just just take it to the whole
Next Level it's when they think that
they need to be needed or that they
offer something special that the team
can't offer without them that they hold
themselves back and all of those are
projections and family Dynamics as well
yeah absolutely and that kind of points
to something that you said earlier about
how family Dynamics is an interesting
way to think about things and it can be
useful but don't get too hung up on it
because I I can imagine some of these
some of these dynamics that come up like
issues with authority might not actually
have come from your family it might have
just come from your school I might have
come from a mixture of those things yeah
like there is a tremendous amount of men
in Silicon Valley who are in the top
tier of their game who got bullied
pretty heavily in the you know these are
a lot of the billionaires a lot of the
like biggest players in Silicon valleys
are men that don't have a like inherent
large social intelligence that they got
fully bullied and so they learned that
there is such a thing as power
and it's real and
that it is a you know doggy dog world
and they need to be in the place where
they have the power
and they're incredibly smart and they
can do it and so so that also in itself
is a projection obviously it's not the
only people who are in you know the top
tier of Silicon Valley but there's quite
a few of them right yeah it seems like a
common cluster characteristic yeah so
this this then also brings us back to
what can we do about this and so we if
we're using this kind of framework to
start recognizing that a lot of the
patterns that are occurring in our lives
are being recreated from our family of
origin and then kind of spreading out
from that to
our community or whether we were bullied
or whether how teachers treated us how
church treated us various things and
we're still recreating these patterns
let's talk about an example of a team or
a personal relationship or a group of
friends
When people's stuff comes up they start
to slot into these roles where one
person will have a set of projections
onto the group and then that will just
happen to click into place when someone
else has their set of projections
and so on around the group I would say
it doesn't click into place unless they
meet uh the right opposite or right
corollary projection yeah yeah it's like
they find themselves and they're like
click and this happens in almost every
marriage I've ever seen I think every
marriage I've ever seen where
their traumas overlap in this perfect
way where they can play the opposite
roles with each other where they can
therefore learn to grow and transform
because of the relationship yeah it's
like people find each other based on the
the complementary surface area of their
traumas and that's the thing that makes
a team yeah yeah and the best part is
that when they get into blame like one
of the main moments when I'm working
with a couple was think something gets
undone is when they realize oh it's
perfectly matched
there's no one to blame here I I'm
holding my side you're holding your side
that's like a great moment when people
see that it loosens the whole thing yeah
and then the dynamic can change and
loosen the relationship can grow or
develop or they can move in separate
directions whichever whichever is right
if they move in separate directions
without healing it they will most likely
create another relationship that's very
similar
yeah that sounds right yeah yeah so it's
interesting there's there's almost this
way that you could frame
like our family Dynamics or our
projections our family projections as
something that holds us back in the
world but it's also exactly the kind of
thing that is like heat seeking seeking
us into exactly the kind of situation we
need to resolve those Dynamics and grow
growth through them
in connection with people yeah the the
reason I said don't make too much of the
family Dynamics is because I don't find
knowing this doesn't help you heal it
very much a little bit it does
but let's take this exact same metaphor
but we'll we'll talk about it on an
emotional level like instead of saying
family Dynamics will say what's
happening emotionally
in your family you were taught certain
emotions you couldn't have them
and your body needs to get to
homeostasis just like if you were taught
you couldn't pee you'd be walking around
trying to find a place to pee
so your body's trying to get the
emotions to move through so that you can
get back to homeostasis
and so what the subconscious is doing is
it's recreating patterns where that
emotion can come up so that it can be
felt and as soon as you fully allow that
emotion you fully surrender into that
emotion and let it move all the way
through you then you'll stop recreating
the pattern
on an emotional level so the intellect
understanding it is useful it loosens it
up
emotionally feeling the thing that the
pattern has taught you not to feel
well very much loosen it up that'll
change it pretty dramatically and the
other thing that helps on a nervous
system level is that when you are in
that pattern there is a felt sense
that's different right and so if you
think about like the time that you got
most angry for no good reason or most I
felt most out of control for no good
reason
even though you might identify the
reason you you realize oh this doesn't
make logical sense that I'd be this
upset
that's the Sensation that you have not
the upsetness but the sensation that's
that's carrying that upsetness that's
how you know you're in your trauma
and so there's a felt sense of going oh
I'm in my trauma I'm in the pattern here
I know this and then that's where the
rational brain can be really helpful and
say oh when I'm in my pattern I just
can't believe my thoughts right now
I can't believe this and I remember in
my journey there was this really
wonderful moment
where somebody came to me it was in a
business thing and they were like hey
what do you what should we do and I said
I can't trust anything I think right now
my brain isn't in a place where I can
trust my thoughts so I'm gonna go get my
brain into place and my body in a place
where I can trust my thoughts where I'm
out of my trauma so that I can think
clearly and we can get to because if I'm
acting out of the trauma I will recreate
it over and over and over and over again
yeah it seems like a great way for the
for the rational intellectual mind to be
able to support the emotion in its
process and then on the on the opposite
side of that I can see
that the thing you just said like my
emotion that just came up is
way more than it should be I could also
see that being a rationalization for
well I should down regulate that emotion
and not have it because it's clearly too
much for this situation
somebody just looked at me a certain way
and I'm all upset but another way to
frame that is this is exactly the amount
of emotion that my system needs and this
thing brought up a bunch of bottled up
pent-up stuff that maybe I don't want to
bring up right now in this environment
and attack people with
but it's a pointer to the fact that it's
there yes and it wants to be felt and it
wants to be processed and it wants to be
loved yeah that's exactly right that's
beautifully said better than I could
have said it so like keeping on the
topic of family Dynamics there's another
thing that I can kind of see
that occurs is that people will go
through a story of life this is maybe
one of the ways that this can be a trap
is that they will say oh I just keep
dating my father I keep dating my mother
and then that's a story and becomes a
belief about themselves and then they
become sort of a learned helplessness
within that
and it seems like the emotional stuff we
were just talking about is a way through
that yes yeah I don't know it seems like
there's there's something useful about
recognizing these things be like oh I
can see I can see what's happening here
because that might be one breadcrumb
back to the thing for me to work with
the emotion to be felt and it also might
only be a breadcrumb back to the thing
next to it and it might actually not
have been a family thing so you can
learn this stuff intellectually you can
learn this stuff oh this is the family
pattern and then it cannot change
and then you can start the belief system
of oh I can't change this
of oh I'm always going to be in this
or you can notice the pattern and you
can have the belief system of this is
going to be really tough to change
and then you can say oh look I've
changed it a little bit but I'm not
making progress quick enough
all of those things are more of the
projections from your Early Childhood
right the belief that I'm not quick
enough that emotions are hard
transformation is difficult I'm not
quick enough I can't do it I'm helpless
mom was helpless
blah blah blah blah blah right so there
it's just be controlled by my emotions
yeah yeah it's just Pi or I can't trust
emotions emotions can't be trusted all
of these things are are learned
from somewhere in the childhood and so
so what often happens is somebody sees
the first thing that they've been
working on and they stick right there on
that thing but they don't see that it's
held in place by a whole bunch of other
ones
yeah and so as one or two start falling
apart it's easier that the rest start
collapsing so that if somebody's
listened to this episode and they're
starting to look for family Dynamics in
their life from this perspective whether
this might be interesting it might be
helpful it might be a trap not not to
take it too too heavily and they start
to see something I mean what's what's
the next step for somebody who starts to
recognize oh wow I've had this pattern
all of my life I can see how it comes
from some form of these Dynamics
and how can I start to see people as an
individual unique human that they are
and not as the people that I was raised
by yeah so the next step to take outside
of learning to recognize it and the best
way to do that is when you're triggered
to know that you're in it then
um and to feel through it which is
another great step
the other thing that's like a couple
really cool tricks to
to play with are first if you find
yourself in a like an emotionally
triggered space stop everything you're
doing feel the emotion and without any
intellect just feel that emotion
trace it back to the first time you ever
felt it
and that will really teach you where
this thing came from so that's a really
useful trick and sometimes just feeling
where it came from and this happens
oftentimes with like things you don't
expect like you might be triggered over
a boss and you find out it has something
to do with a babysitter or you might be
triggered over money and you find it has
something to do with a dad so that's
that's a cool trick and then another
really cool trick as far as like next
steps of kind of dilapidating the
programming is to remember that all of
these programs came
for a good reason you know like
if you were striving your whole life to
find your dad's love and so you're
programmed to strive for love
well that's your job as a kid is to make
sure you're loved by your dad or you
might not survive it's like it's just
Instinct and it's
and it's beautiful and so can you love
these patterns can you respect them for
what they tried to give you can you just
help them find new ways of doing it more
effectively
rather than move into you shouldn't be
doing this so I keep doing that what's
the problem here because that's just
more of the pattern
so learning what the pattern has done
for you how it's served you that it's
intent even if it's mean and vicious its
intent is to take care of you and to see
that and to honor that also is really
effective in allowing the patterns to
become more useful and more effective
and more functional yeah it's almost
like like honoring honoring your path to
have been perfect as it is and your
behavior to have developed according to
very logical
environmental shapings yeah makes it
easier to step forward and say that my
my future behavior is also going to make
perfect sense in some regard and I don't
need to be self-critical and I can just
feel what's true for me yeah I was just
dealing with a person recently somebody
old friend who I love dearly and just
going through the Heat
and at some point he looked up and he
said to me he said um
you know I realized
that it doesn't matter who
would have been put into my position
this is what would have happened to them
like he saw that it wasn't personal to
him that the the life the patterns all
of it wasn't personal to him that
anybody put into that situation would
have ended up that way
he could just it was so much relief in
that so do you have any integration
questions for us about family Dynamics
oh
yeah
the first one would be what's the
pattern in your life that you most
feel holds you back and then the second
question would be
what's the way that you try to avoid it
that's actually keeping it in place
what's the way that you're trying to
avoid that pattern that actually holds
the pattern in place would be this other
way to say that
and then the third question is what is
it about this pattern that's been
serving you has tried to serve you and
and has served you in the past yeah
great questions thank you Joe thank you
Brett
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
in your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]